jenkins:
 jenkins is a tool used to implement ci-cd
 jenkins is a open-source automation tool created in java programing language with some built-in functions.
 jenkins is used to build and test your software application ,it is more helpful for developers, to change application according to the client request.
advantages of jenkins:
1)free of cost
2)easy to set-up
3)easy to track the bugs
4)it is a open-source tool with great community support.
5)notify to developer about the report.

tell something about ci-cd?
ci-cd stands for continous integration and continous delivery
there are five stages in the ci-cd
1)continuous Download
2)continuous build
3)continuous deployment
4)continuous testing
5)continuous delivery

first 3 stages are cotinuous integration
and last two stages are continuous delivery.

1)continuous download:
   in this stage code if download from the git hub continuously .
2)continuous build:
   in the last stage code download and this stage code is convertd to artifacts ,with some artifacts tools like maven,ant etc...
3)continuous deployment:
  in the last stage artifacts are crated, in this stage artifacts deploy in the applications like (tomcat,nginx,httpd)
4)continuous testing:
  in this stage code is convert to selinum scripts.check the application is running according to the clients requiremnt or not,if the application is not running according to the clients requrement then a notification is send to developers.
5)continuous delivery:
  here is the end user can access the our application.


master slave architure:
this is used to distribute the workload to the additional linux servers called as master slave architecture
this is used when we want run multipe jobs parallely we will use jenkins.

when we create a jenkins server ,in the server automatically jenkins user is created.
 step 1:
    go to the jenkins user command is:  su - jenkins
 step 2:
      now do ssh-keygen
      save the public key in note or any ware
 step3: mow create a new server
     create a user with command:  adduser -m jenkins
     go into the user with the command :  su - jenkins
     now do shh-keygen
       save the public key of the jenkins in the ssh-keygen
        commmand is: vim /.ssh/authorized_keys
                 paste the public key in the authorized_key
 step4:now go to the jenkins site
      ->  goto manage jenkins
            ->in manage jenkins go to crenditals
             ->in crenditals select the ssh username with keypair
              ->user name : jenkins
		->add the private key of maaster jenkins
                  ->create
     
 step5: now go to manage jenkins
        ->manage nodes:
             slave name: sr
                  yes perminet agent
           create
            -> name: slave1
		-> remote root directory : /home/jenkins
                -> host: private ip of worker slave
                ->label: sr
		->credintals: jeNkins
		->Host key verfication statGY : NoN VerFiGinG VerFiCAtion StatergY




to ruN oVer appliCATion oN slave steps is:
step1:
go to procject, general: restrict where this project can be run
  labels: slave1
  save.


what is the command to install jaenkins?
ans:  java -jaar jenkins.war

how you will schuled the task?
first go to the jenkins dashboard
   in jenkins dashboard go to the new item and select the freestyle project and give name to the project and save the project
   the go the project set the jobs according to the requirement

                                                                                                    
what is pipline?
   pipeline is a process of implementing all the stages of ci-cd .
   from the level of groovy scripts is called as jenkins file
there are two types of pipeline
1)scripted pipeline
2)declerative pipeline


1)scripted pipeline:
   sequence of stages to performing all  ci-cd stages
syntax:
node('built-in'){
stage('step1'){
     grovy script
}
stage('step2'){
     grovy script
}
} 


2)declerative pipeline :
  stages divided in multiple steps for implementing ci-cd, for easy undstandable.
syntax:
  pipleline
  {
   agent any
   stages{
    stage('stage1'){
      steps
      {
	groovy script
      }
   }
}


what is artifact ?
artifact is an immutable file, generated during a build.
what is node ?
it a sever

What are the different ways to trigger jenkins pipelines ?
there are two ways to trriger the jenkins pipleline
   1)poll SCM: jenkins will continues check for any changes in the git hub.
   2)webhook: if any new commit is upladed in the git ,then git will inform to the jenkins we have a new commit , then jenkins will perform job, using build trigger in jenkins

how you will secure jenkins?
1)ensure global security is on
2)Credentials Plugin: Jenkins provides a credentials plugin that can be used to store secrets such as passwords, API keys, and certificates. The secrets are encrypted and stored securely within Jenkins, and can be easily retrieved in build scripts or used in other plugins.
3)Third-party Secret Management Tools: Jenkins can also be integrated with third-party secret management tools such as AWS Secrets Manager, Google Cloud Key Management Service, and Azure Key Vault.



what is relation between hudson and jenkins?
  both are smae ,but hudson lanched first and then they did changes to the hudson relaunched it as jenkins in 2008
Q: What is latest version of Jenkins or which version of Jenkins are you using ?
  the latest version of jenkins is 2.426. 3 and 2.440. 3

Q: What is shared modules in Jenkins ?

1)libreies
2)jenkins file
3)plugins
4)global variables

Q: What are some of the common plugins that you use in Jenkins ?

1)maVen
2)copy artifact
3)aws ec2
4|)backup 
5)thin backup
6)deploy artifact to container

How to add a new plugin in Jenkins ?
Click on the "Manage Jenkins" link in the left-side menu.
Click on the "Manage Plugins" link.

How to backup Jenkins ?

there are muliple ways 
1)using plugins
2)using amazon efs
3)USING aws volumes



what is post build conditions?
post build section defines one or more additional steps at end of the script or pipeline
 

1)success
2)failure
3)abort
4)always
5)stable


what is exception handling?
this is the process of overcoming potential error and continuing the condition
  in try state we have the condtion , if condition fails it will move to the (catch(Exection e)
  in the catch(Exection e) it will store detail about developer or any body

what multi branch pipeline?
generally devlopers will create diffrent branchs, in each branch they will create diffrent functionals
over responibility to create jenkins files in each branch according to the functions.
                                
how you will create user in  the jenkins ?
step 1:
  go to the dashboard of the jenkins
   -> in dashboard of  the jenkins go to manage jenkins: -> in manage jenkins we will see manage user, here cerate user

step 2: go to manage plugins
         install a plugin called as role based authorization strategy.

step3: click on configure gobal security
   check anable security checkbox
   now goto authorization section --> click on role based strategy
    save the steps
step4: now go to manage jenkins
 click on manage and assign roles
  steting according to the requirement.
svae the changes.
                                            